You should talk about that a lit
Just from a military standpoint,
in all wars
when there are civilians around
and there are targets of that,
that are believed to be of milit
necessity, there are calculation
essentially done
about how valuable is the target
What is the risk of civilian los
and how much civilian loss is ac
And these are horrible
calculations that are
but these are calculations
that armies make during war
a situation like this
operating on the ground in a hos
has got to be extraordinarily di
Sure.
And you're exactly right, Anders
About the way you cast it.
You know what the target is?
You know how valuable it is.
You try to estimate what the ris
are of hurting civilians
and then you have to make the ju
as to whether the target
going after the target,
taking out the target,
is worth the risk of injuring pe
who are innocent
and not part of the enemy force.
But here you're dealing with the
and control node of Hamas.
You're dealing with Hamas
that has deliberately,
cynically located
its most valuable assets
in a hospital
deliberately to try to provoke
outrage in the world
community and discredit Israel
Israelis know this.
They've got really great intel o
When those soldiers go in
in armored vehicles first
and then dismounted into the bui
and it is a very complex compoun
as you saw from the overhead cov
that helicopters
will have drones overhead.
They'll be able to mark
and many positions with lasers.
They'll be able to deliver preci
if there is an opponent there.
And then they've got to go insid
and if Hamas is there,
yes, there could be a shootout
in a hospital corridor
and they're going to have to
get to the bottom of it
and they're going to have to sea
for the tunnel entrances around
So every at every step,
the soldier on the ground,
the tank commander
and so forth is at risk.
He's putting himself out there.
He's likely to draw fire.
He has the right to self-defense
no matter what always.
And he's going to respond
if he is attacked.
But he's got a lot of assets
backing him up,
a lot of other eyes on the battl
So it's everything
that can possibly be done
to protect civilians
and still go after the command
and control at the hospital.
And the Israelis militarily,
they have to do this.
One of the things I'm surprised
there is not more outrage out
internationally about is that Ha
two years, say,
to preparing this attack or a ye
however long it was.
We don't know the exact amount o
that they've been preparing,
but certainly they've been prepa
for quite some time.
They have not made any effort
to build
any bomb shelter
for any civilian,
it seems, in the Gaza Strip.
They built tunnels for themselve
to store supplies and weapons
and to protect themselves.
But there are not bomb shelters
the kind of shelters that you se
on the sides of the road
in Israel
by bus stops to protect against
Those don't
exist on the streets of of Gaza.
Have you in your military experi
have you seen many countries
or territories
with a military that does not
prepare or have some sort of saf
harbor for its civilians?
Well, no, but on the other hand,
Hamas deliberately wants these c
to be at risk.
Well, that's I mean, that's the
Yes, but
but I still find it stunning tha
that doesn't seem to register wi
a lot of people.
Well,
the thing about it, Anderson, is
we call Hamas a terrorist orders
I suppose actually,
the government of the Gaza Strip
they're in charge of everything.
And they have had
received hundreds of millions of
from Qatar and other places
and they have not built
any bomb shelters for their peop
Right.
Because they're not interested
in protecting their people.
They're interested
in provoking
international outrage against Is
They knew that
when they launched this attack
and they hoped to draw Israel in
bog Israel down, cause
a lot of casualties,
do exactly what they're doing wi
opinion, have a lot of voices ou
saying cease fire, cease fire,
cease fire,
and try to stop the Israeli assa
and then declare victory.
That's that's the goal
and show the more civilian casua
that the Israelis inflict,
even though they don't
want to inflict any.
The greater
Hamas believes its chances of su
And, Nic,
I mean, it's accurate to say
that the health officials
in Gaza have denied repeatedly
that Al-Shifa Hospital or others
are being used by Hamas for any
I don't even want to call it
military purposes because,
I mean, for any of their own pur
they have.
And and it's something.
Health officials in Gaza,
Hamas run health officials say i
for other hospitals that
we've been speaking.
CNN has been speaking
with officials from the hospital
over the last few days.
And just going through
our latest information on that,
it appears the most recent over
couple of days, data
that we have
from the hospital itself,
from our Shifa Hospital
they say there are about 7000 ci
taking refuge there
or there were until recently.
It's not clear
how many of those
might have left and about 1500 s
100 or so doctors,
other medical officials
and included in that.
1500, of course, several hundred
as well as well as sort of suppo
in the hospital.
So it's still a big complex,
a complex, complex
and it still appears
a significant
number of people working there.
You would have to assume
that these health officials
would have knowledge
of the whole complex.
There's a lot of people
there would have knowledge
of the nooks and crannies, if yo
There wouldn't be places
that they wouldn't know about wi
within the hospital complex.
So they continue to say
Hamas isn't there.
But I mean, they're considering
about and about Israel.
Yeah.
I mean, anybody who has operated
who has reported from Gaza.
No, I mean, you see rockets bein
from civilian areas.
You see rockets being fired from
the building where you're at.
You're the building.
You know, the time
I was the last time I was in Gaz
I can see where rockets are bein
from in buildings nearby me.
People,
you know,
even the doctors in the hospital
no Hamas,
as long as Jihad
and others are firing rockets
over their hospitals.
But they don't speak out about i
because they don't want to get k
I mean, they obviously
nobody speaks out against Hamas
for fear of their own safety.
Maybe they agree with Hamas.
Maybe they don't.
And a lot of people don't in Gaz
don't like Hamas.
But but people aren't don't spea
But people know
do they know where the tunnels
locations are or where the the
the rockets are being fired from
You can see it
and this is
in a nutshell, people people, pe
people are scared.
I mean,
be when Hamas was voted
voted in by the electorate
and Gaza to power in 2006, 2007,
they went round throwing out
of windows of high buildings
the political opposition
and they might have won
an election in 2006
but they've maintain control eve
Through fear and intimidation
they might have
a hardcore base of supporters
that hoo hoo hoo ha,
you know who genuinely believe i
But the vast
majority of people would would n
to speak out against them.
Would fear speaking out against
Like you, Anderson,
I've been to Gaza
and had those private conversati
away from cameras with people
who will tell you
precisely
that we are too afraid to speak
Hamas has done this to me
the last time I was there.
And I why am I
the last time I was there,
I watched as the Hamas
two guys on motorbikes
dragged two human beings
along on the ground,
their legs tied together
with rope or chains to the motor
And they were dragging them
through the streets
as a warning to other people.
I don't know what those people
have been accused of,
but they were Palestinians
and they were dead.
And they were being dragged.
They were accused
probably of being collaborators.
And they dragged them
through the streets
as a warning to everybody else
to stay silent and to not collab
we're over time.
Nic Robertson, thank you.
General Wesley Clark, thank you